---
title: "02 18 2025"
date: 2025-02-18T06:58:10-05:00
draft: true
categories: ["microblog"]
tags: ["daily"]
hiddenInHomeList: true
---

I want to build something that promises to change the world. It should save lives, bring joy to the depressed, fill the future with an optimistic hue, and make everyone want to stick around for eternity. The conflict in my life is that I am not working on anything that will do any of this. I am building dashboards for a call agent and trying to recreate an irritating human interaction. My life will amount to nothing if I do not change my trajectory.

I can start with the sadnesses that plague myself. I have pain and discomfort and uncertainty that boil up out of a dreary routine. Should I be asking how to make myself happy? Should I try to become happy given my situation? The happiness I want is not at a finite peak on some mysterious mountain, it is simply a different mountain. I know how to be happy during the struggle but when the struggle is for a pittance of worldly impact the happiness is diluted.

Software development is a career of puzzle solving and selfishly, I find it fun for its own sake. I can spend a long weekend learning a technology (Electron) I may never use again and still step out the other side with an air of productivity or learning or something not completely diseased with wastefulness. But its this for-its-own-sakeness that makes software miss the mark. The term should be replaced by what it is. "Tool use" maybe. And in that case I can envision how a career of tool use could hone an appreciation and affinity for craftsmanship. Craftsmanship benefits all pursuits. But the names of these careers are tilted away from a specific life goal or purpose. Gurpose. They are verbs reveling in their own action, detached from any one superior mission.

That's it. You need two specializations in any one life, a specialization in craftsmanship and a specialization in creation. One to take you there and one to tell you where it is. Creation in itself means nothing. A specialization in creation is a thing you decide on, from the ether of your being. What do you want to create? How do you want the world and its universe to fold? There are no objective goals of creation, not healthcare, not democracy, not greatness, although each of these is strongly supported by the force of things and the intentions of millions of souls. You can create whatever you would like as long as you can convince yourself it needs creating. There is something convincing about life, vitality, energy, efficiency, and morality in most cases but they are not universal truths, just the shadow of something dancing in the strings.

To find what you wish to create, you need to step back from what the world and its minds have taught you to value. I regret listing the convincing arguments of the universe above since I've now primed you and myself to think inside the geometry of our culture. I don't quite know how to escape these shapes. Is there a first principle about life that a billion others who have lived longer lives than mine have not already uncovered. God would not allow that, I would hope. Below our morals, life, and love is more of something and beneath that more. Our values today are guided by what we are as humans, with our biomechanically optimized skeletons, intricate sinuses, gut-brain interactions, and tendencies to waste away. But humans are not the universe and the universe is not a human. There are plants, empty space, and quantum interactions. A human is a spec, albeit a glorious one, on the canvas of all that there is, and we can revel in what we have. But birds and cats have brains too, and somewhere in the expanse there is something magnitudes more intelligent than all of humanity. Does that thing know where hence it has come? Does that mind consider the ants and the leaves and choose to let them be for a conscious reason? And if so, what is it?

Life. I start with life, but its only out of habit. Existence. To be alive and aware of the aliveness. It is a gift with bilateral potential. To understand the obscurity of it while simultaneously struggling with the realization that you are wasting it is a brutal experience, morose, horrifying. You have been given everything and you yield nothing. Is culture to blame for this expectation? The universe does not call for you to create, in fact. I have never heard the susurrant voice of God asking me for something. What then, is the conflict? That we expect to be at the barrel end of expectations and therefore twist ourselves to satisfy them, only to continuously realize there are no expectations and that we are fighting a battle that only exists in our minds?

Go further. Even if you were to invent or unveil the greatest goal of your existence, what would be the final outcome. Would you be aiming to change the fabric of the universe? And if you accomplished that, and revealed that the universe and its expectations were malleable, would you need a new goal to satisfy the new expectations? Would it ever stop and if it stopped, is that death?

Forget it all, to create is hardly to do anything. The universe has decided on its limits and whether those limits are static or dynamic, our efforts to create within them must not be confused with our pursuit of a higher means of being. We create to create. We do not create to satisfy the expectations of the universe. For one, the expectations can hardly be known. For two, the opposite of creation is destruction and we know that that happens as well. Creation and destruction happen in concert. Therefore, aiming to create more than you destroy is also an aim to unsettle the balance of everything. How short-sighted of you.

In another light then, if we are not expected to create and we must create and destroy evenly without knowing the limits of either, is there a goal that we can formulate that is satisfyingly challenging? Of course, to settle at the lowest limit seems easy. To create nothing and destroy nothing. To reach for the highest limit is impossible. Create everything and destroy everything. At our deaths I guess this is not impossible. We created the outcomes of our lives and then disappeared. But we are not concerned with the end as that is not where we are. In the middle, between nothing and nothing, we live arguably boring lives. The something between the nothings. And while there is no expectation to make that something anything, we want to. At one time, I wondered if the goal was to see how high of a spike that middle something could make on a chart but height and time have such little raw meaning in this context that the thought basically extinguished itself. And it feels like a cop-out to leave this article without an answer or suggestion but it seems thats the way it will have to be. Perhaps there are no expectations and we really are staying at our jobs so we can afford the temporary comfort of our apartments and costco food stocks.